# Internationaliztion and Localization

Brut uses Ruby's i18n gem to provide support for localization and internationalization.

## Overview

`Brut::I18n::BaseMethods` provides the core implementation of Brut's i18n support, and it largely wraps the `t`
and `l` methods of the i18n gem.


Consider this:

```ruby
t("my.key", foo: "Bar")
```

This will locate the string with the key `my.key` and return it, replacing `%{foo}` with `"Bar"`, if `%{foo}` is
present in the string.

The keys are located in files in `app/config/i18n`.  The directories there correspond to the locales your app
supports, e.g .`app/config/i18n/en` would hold translations for English.

The translation files themselves are 🎉**NOT YAML**🎊.  They are Ruby files.  By default, there are two files: `app/config/i18n/en/1_defaults.rb` and `app/config/i18n/en/2_app.rb` (noting that `/en/` is for English and other langauges are obviously supported).

`1_defaults.rb` provides values for keys Brut may require or use, such as for front-end constraint violations.
`2_app.rb` provides your app's keys. If this file contains the same keys as `1_defaults.rb`, your file's values
will be used.

The file is a giant Hash, so the key above might look like so:

```ruby
{
  my: {
    key: "Hello there %{foo}",
  },
}
```

### Enhancements

Brut's `t` tries to balance predictability with flexibility. It will always try to tell you what keys it was
checking when it cannot find a translation or what interpolated values were missing.

#### Basic Usage

Often, keys contain dynamic elements.  Rather that creating a key like `widget.status.#{widget.status}`, you can
pass an array in and it'll be joined for you:

```ruby
t([ :widget, :status, widget.status ]) #=> widget.status.active e.g.
```

`t` can also take a block that will be evaluated and substituted into the `block` interpolation value:

```ruby
{
  supportlink: "To contact support %{block}',
}

t(:supportlink) do
  "<a href='https://support.example.com'>Contact Support</a>"
end
```

See below for how this affects HTML generation.

#### Page- and Component-specific Values

If you call `t` inside `page_template`, or inside `view_template` of a [page private
component](/components#page-private-components), you can simplify the key specification.

```ruby
t(:nevermind)
```

If this is used on, say, `NewWidgetPage`, Brut will try to locate the key `pages.NewWidgetPage.nevermind`.  This works on page private components as well.

Inside a normal component, it works simliarly.  Suppose `FlashComponent` had this:

```ruby
if !flash
  t(:default_message)
end
```

This would locate `components.FlashComponent.default_message`.

This saves some typing, but it can also assist refactoring. If you rename a page or component, calls to `t` will blow up, reminding you to move the translations inside `2_app.rb`.

### HTML Escaping

`Brut::I18n::BaseMethods` cannot be used directly.  One of three submodules must be used: `ForHTML`, `ForCLI`, or
`ForBackend`.  This is to allow the `ForHTML` module to properly escape HTML.

When a translation accepts a block, that block could be HTML and you would want that HTML be included in the
page, un-escaped.  Brut achieves this by first using Phlex's `capture` method, then marking it as HTML safe using
`safe`.

Thus, as long as you aren't introducing injections in your translations file or source code, it is safe to do the following:

```ruby
def view_template
  div do
    raw(
      t(page: :contact_support) do
        a(href: "https://support.example.com") do
          t(page: :support_link_name)
        end
      end
    )
  end
end
```

The result of `t` is safe HTML, so you must use `raw` to avoid escaping it.

In a CLI or back-end context, HTML escaping is not relevant and can actually create problems, so `ForCLI` and
`ForBackend` no-op `safe` and `capture`.

When using `ForHTML`, all interpolated values are HTML-escaped.  `ForCLI` and `ForBackend` are not.

### Localizing Dates and Times

`l` can be called and this defers to the Ruby I18n library.

Date and time formats can be configured in the translation files.  `l` does not accept a full key for the format.
It is created dynamically by the library, so you must take care in which one you use.  If you pass a `Date` into
`l`, `date.formats.«format»` is used. If you pass a `Time` in, `time.formats.«format»` is used.

The values of the formats are strings suitable for
[`strftime`](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/strftime.3.html).  The site [strif.me](https://www.strfti.me/) can be helpful in conjuring the right value.

Brut includes translations for various formats that you can inspect in `app/config/i18n/«lang»/1_defaults.rb`.

### Displaying Dates and Times in HTML

While `l` will return a string you can use anywhere, you are most likely going to show dates and times in HTML.
For that, you should use a `<time>` element.  Brut provides `Brut::FrontEnd::Components::TimeTag` (remember that if you `include Brut::FrontEnd::Components`, it's a Phlex *kit* and thus you can use `TimeTag(...)` directly) to do this. It contains additional behavior to make friendly dates and times.

* You can give it a `timestamp:` or `date:` to control which formatting style is used.
* `skip_year_if_same`, if true, will omit the year from any format if the current year is the same as the year being displayed. This is true by default
* `skip_dow_if_not_this_week`, if true, will omit the day of week if the date or time is more than 7 days in the past.  This is true by default.

The way `skip_year_if_same` and `skip_dow_if_not_this_week` work is to append `no_year` and/or `no_dow` to
existing format strings which are assumed to omit this elements.

If you wish to create your own formats, you can add them as well.

### Constraint Violations and Field Names

The interpolated value `{field}` is special. It is assumed to be the name of a field in a constraint violation
message, e.g. `"%{field} is required"`.  It is the only interpolated value that can be omitted without causing an
error.

If included, it will work as normal:

```ruby
t("cv.ss.required", field: "Email") # => Email is required
```

If omitted, the value of `"cv.this_field"` is used. This is included in `1_default.rb`, but if it's
missing, Brut will raise.  Assuming the value is `"This field"`:

```ruby
t("cv.ss.required") # => This field is required
```

## Testing

In tests, you can call `t` and `l` to examine values as needed. You may find the
`have_i18n_string` matcher usefult to check generated HTML for I18n values (see `Brut::SpecSupport::Matchers::HaveI18nString`).

> [!WARNING]
> Brut hardcodes English for tests, which you may not want.  This will be addressed
> in the future.

## Recommended Practices

None at this time, however Brut's I18n has not been battle-tested.


## Technical Notes

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Technical Notes are for deeper understanding and debugging. While we will try to keep them up-to-date with changes to Brut's
> internals, the source code is always more correct.

_Last Updated May 7, 2025_

None at this time.
